README.md, before:

# tcrgrapher

R package for identifying condition associated T cell clones from a single 
repertoire.

## Installation

```R
install.packages('devtools')
library(devtools)
# to install the develop version
devtools::install_github("KseniaMIPT/tcrgrapher@develop")
```

To calculate generation probability, TCRgrapher can use OLGA or SONIA. 

For detailed information about OLGA, please visit
https://github.com/statbiophys/OLGA.

OLGA can be installed using pip or pip3.

```python
pip install olga
```

For detailed information about SONIA, please visit
https://github.com/statbiophys/SONIA

SONIA is a Python 2.7/3.6 software. It is available on PyPI and can be 
downloaded and installed through pip:

```python
pip install sonia
```

## Data loading

Data are stored in a TCRgrapher object. TCRgrapher is a S4 class that can be 
constructed by calling the TCRgrapher( ) function. TCRgrapher contains clonoset 
and metadata as data.tables.

There are three ways to initialize an object.

(1) Specify the path to the one file without metadata

If the path for only one file is specified, metadata will be produced automatically
and will contain one row and two columns: "file" and "sample_id".
Clonoset will have and additional column "sample_id" with one unique value and a
column "clone_id" with an unique id for every row.
Positions of "count", "cdr3nt", "cdr3aa", "V gene", "J gene" clonoset's columns must be specified.

```R
# See ?TCRgrapher
TCRgrObject <- TCRgrapher(file_path, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7) # positions of clonoset's columns
```

(2) Specify the path to the directory with files without metadata

If the path for the directory with files is specified and metadata is not specified,
metadata will be produced automatically and will have a number of rows equal
to the number of samples in the directory. All files will be merged into one
data.table with additional columns "sample_id"  and "clone_id" with
unique ids  for every row. Positions of "count", "cdr3nt", "cdr3aa",
"V gene", "J gene" clonoset's columns must be specified.

```R
TCRgrObject <- TCRgrapher(dir_path, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7)
```

(3) Specify the path to the directory with files and metadata

If the path for the directory with files and the path to the metadata are specified,
only files from the metadata column "file" will be taken into consideration.
Clonosets will be merged into one data.table with additional columns "sample_id" and
"clone_id" with unique ids for every row.
Values in the "sample_id" column will be the same as in the "sample_id"
metadata column. Positions of "count", "cdr3nt", "cdr3aa", "V gene", "J gene" clonoset's
columns and "file", "sampl_id" metadata's columns must be specified.

```R
TCRgrObject <- TCRgrapher(dir_path, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, # positions of clonoset's columns
                         metadata_path, 1, 2)      # positions of metadtata's columns
```
```R
# get metadata
metadata(your_TCRgrapher_object)
# get clonoset
clonoset(your_TCRgrapher_object)
# add column
clonoset(your_TCRgrapher_object)$col <- your_vector
# subsetting (correct subsetting is important for edgeR analysis)
subset(your_TCRgrapher_object, vector_with_sample_ids_to_keep)
```

## ALICE pipeline

```ALICE_pipeline``` The function takes a TCRgrapher object as an input and performs
neighborhood enrichment analysis using the ALICE algorithm. You can find default 
parameters and possible options below.

```R
ALICE_pipeline(TCRgrObject, Q_val = 6.27, cores = 1, thres_counts = 1, N_neighbors_thres = 1, 
          p_adjust_method = "BH", chain = 'mouseTRB', stats = 'OLGA', model= '-')
```
* TCRgrObject - TCRgrapher object that contains a clonotype table
* Q - Selection factor. 1/Q sequences pass selection in a thymus. The default 
value for mice is 6.27. If a human model is taken and Q is not changed manually,
Q = 27 is used
* cores - number of used cores, 1 by default
* thres_counts - Only sequences with a number of counts above this threshold are
taken into account
* N_neighbors_thres - Only sequences with a number of neighbors above the 
threshold are used to calculate generation probability
* p_adjust_method - One of the methods from p.adjust in the stats package. 
Possible options: "bonferroni", "holm", "hochberg", "hommel", "BH" or "fdr", "BY",
"none". "BH" is a default method.
* chain - statistical model selection. Possible options: "mouseTRB", "humanTRB" 
and "humanTRA".
* stats - a tool that will be used for generation probability calculation. 
Possible options: "OLGA", "SONIA". "SONIA" also calculates Q for every sequence.
* model - the standard OLGA generation probability model is used by default. 
To set your generation probability model, write 
"set_custom_model_VDJ <path_to_folder_with_model>". A generation probability model
is usually IGOR output. A folder should contain the following files: 
V_gene_CDR3_anchors.csv, J_gene_CDR3_anchors.csv, model_marginals.txt, and 
model_params.txt. Some models can be found in the folder "model".

The function returns a TCRgrapher object with the same clonotype table as the 
input, filtered by the number of counts and the number of neighbors with 
additional columns. Additional columns include the following
* D - The number of clonoset neighbors. Neighbor is a similar sequence with one 
mismatch
* VJ_n_total - Number of unique sequences with the given VJ combination
* Pgen - Probability to be generated, computed by OLGA
* Pgen_sum_corr - The sum of Pgen of all sequences similar to the given with one
mismatch
* Pgen_by_VJ - conditional probability. The sum of probabilities to be generated 
with the given VJ combination
* p_val - p value under the null hypothesis that the number of sequence's neighbors
is not more than in the random model
* p_adjust - p value with multiple testing correction

## Additional functions for ALICE analysis

```pval_with_abundance(df)``` The function takes the output of the ALICE_pipeline 
function and adjusts the p-value, taking into account the abundance of every clonotype.
There are two additional columns in the output depending on count normalization:
"pval_with_abundance_log2_counts" - Log2 is used for count normalization; 
"pval_with_abundance_counts" - no count normalization.

# edgeR analysis

```edgeR_pipeline``` The function performs statistical analysis by edgeR to 
identify significantly expanded clonotypes. First, it filters the data using 
relatively mild conditions that better suit TCR repertoire data. Second, it 
normalizes counts and estimates dispersion by standard edgeR methods. Finally, 
it performs all pairwise comparisons between groups and compares each group vs. 
all others using the GLM and QL F-test.

To use the edgeR_pipeline function, you should create a TCRgrapherCounts object.
TCRgrapherCounts is a subclass of TCRgrapher with additional slots: count_table
and feature_info. Count data could be aggregated in the following ways. First, 
clonotypes with the same amino acid sequences and V gene would be merged together
using the default parameters  ```TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject)```. Second, 
clonotypes with the same amino acid sequences and VJ combination would be merged 
together using the j_jene parameter ```TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject, j_gene = TRUE)```.
Third, clonotypes with the same amino acid sequences regardless of VJ would be merged.
```TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject, v_gene = FALSE, j_gene = FALSE)```. Finally, 
clonotypes from the same connectivity component found by the make_TCR_graph and 
find_TCR_components functions would be grouped together by running 
```TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject, cluster_id = TRUE)```

Metadata must contain a column that specifies levels of comparison. The name of the
column is the second parameter of the edgeR_pipeline function.

```R
library(edgeR)
# data loading
TCRgrObject <- TCRgrapher(dir_path, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, metadata_path, 1, 2)
# create a count table with aggregation by V segments
TCRgrCounts <- TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject)
# run EdgeR pipeline 
edgeR_res <- edgeR_pipeline(TCRgrCounts, your_comparison)
```

## Additional functions

```make_TCR_graph(clonoset, v_gene = TRUE, j_gene = FALSE)``` 
The function makes a graph from a clonoset table with the igraph package. Every
node of the graph is a unique clonotype from the table (one line). Edges connect
clonotypes with one amino acid mismatch or identical clonotypes if they were in 
separate lines. If 'v_gene' and 'j_gene' are TRUE, edges connect only clonotypes
with the same V gene or VJ combination.

```find_TCR_components(clonoset, graph)``` The function takes a clonoset table 
and make_TCR_graph output and returns the same clonoset table with an additional
column "cluster_id". All clusters of neighbors with one mismatch have a unique id.

Commit message:

headers levels, find_TCR_components_by_bfs, small changes in pval_with_abundance

README.md, after:

# tcrgrapher

R package for identifying condition associated T cell clones from a single 
repertoire.

## Installation

```R
install.packages('devtools')
library(devtools)
# to install the develop version
devtools::install_github("KseniaMIPT/tcrgrapher@develop")
```

To calculate generation probability, TCRgrapher can use OLGA or SONIA. 

For detailed information about OLGA, please visit
https://github.com/statbiophys/OLGA.

OLGA can be installed using pip or pip3.

```python
pip install olga
```

For detailed information about SONIA, please visit
https://github.com/statbiophys/SONIA

SONIA is a Python 2.7/3.6 software. It is available on PyPI and can be 
downloaded and installed through pip:

```python
pip install sonia
```

## Data loading

Data are stored in a TCRgrapher object. TCRgrapher is a S4 class that can be 
constructed by calling the TCRgrapher( ) function. TCRgrapher contains clonoset 
and metadata as data.tables.

There are three ways to initialize an object.

(1) Specify the path to the one file without metadata

If the path for only one file is specified, metadata will be produced automatically
and will contain one row and two columns: "file" and "sample_id".
Clonoset will have and additional column "sample_id" with one unique value and a
column "clone_id" with an unique id for every row.
Positions of "count", "cdr3nt", "cdr3aa", "V gene", "J gene" clonoset's columns must be specified.

```R
# See ?TCRgrapher
TCRgrObject <- TCRgrapher(file_path, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7) # positions of clonoset's columns
```

(2) Specify the path to the directory with files without metadata

If the path for the directory with files is specified and metadata is not specified,
metadata will be produced automatically and will have a number of rows equal
to the number of samples in the directory. All files will be merged into one
data.table with additional columns "sample_id"  and "clone_id" with
unique ids  for every row. Positions of "count", "cdr3nt", "cdr3aa",
"V gene", "J gene" clonoset's columns must be specified.

```R
TCRgrObject <- TCRgrapher(dir_path, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7)
```

(3) Specify the path to the directory with files and metadata

If the path for the directory with files and the path to the metadata are specified,
only files from the metadata column "file" will be taken into consideration.
Clonosets will be merged into one data.table with additional columns "sample_id" and
"clone_id" with unique ids for every row.
Values in the "sample_id" column will be the same as in the "sample_id"
metadata column. Positions of "count", "cdr3nt", "cdr3aa", "V gene", "J gene" clonoset's
columns and "file", "sampl_id" metadata's columns must be specified.

```R
TCRgrObject <- TCRgrapher(dir_path, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, # positions of clonoset's columns
                         metadata_path, 1, 2)      # positions of metadtata's columns
```
```R
# get metadata
metadata(your_TCRgrapher_object)
# get clonoset
clonoset(your_TCRgrapher_object)
# add column
clonoset(your_TCRgrapher_object)$col <- your_vector
# subsetting (correct subsetting is important for edgeR analysis)
subset(your_TCRgrapher_object, vector_with_sample_ids_to_keep)
```

## ALICE pipeline

```ALICE_pipeline``` The function takes a TCRgrapher object as an input and performs
neighborhood enrichment analysis using the ALICE algorithm. You can find default 
parameters and possible options below.

```R
ALICE_pipeline(TCRgrObject, Q_val = 6.27, cores = 1, thres_counts = 1, N_neighbors_thres = 1, 
          p_adjust_method = "BH", chain = 'mouseTRB', stats = 'OLGA', model= '-')
```
* TCRgrObject - TCRgrapher object that contains a clonotype table
* Q - Selection factor. 1/Q sequences pass selection in a thymus. The default 
value for mice is 6.27. If a human model is taken and Q is not changed manually,
Q = 27 is used
* cores - number of used cores, 1 by default
* thres_counts - Only sequences with a number of counts above this threshold are
taken into account
* N_neighbors_thres - Only sequences with a number of neighbors above the 
threshold are used to calculate generation probability
* p_adjust_method - One of the methods from p.adjust in the stats package. 
Possible options: "bonferroni", "holm", "hochberg", "hommel", "BH" or "fdr", "BY",
"none". "BH" is a default method.
* chain - statistical model selection. Possible options: "mouseTRB", "humanTRB" 
and "humanTRA".
* stats - a tool that will be used for generation probability calculation. 
Possible options: "OLGA", "SONIA". "SONIA" also calculates Q for every sequence.
* model - the standard OLGA generation probability model is used by default. 
To set your generation probability model, write 
"set_custom_model_VDJ <path_to_folder_with_model>". A generation probability model
is usually IGOR output. A folder should contain the following files: 
V_gene_CDR3_anchors.csv, J_gene_CDR3_anchors.csv, model_marginals.txt, and 
model_params.txt. Some models can be found in the folder "model".

The function returns a TCRgrapher object with the same clonotype table as the 
input, filtered by the number of counts and the number of neighbors with 
additional columns. Additional columns include the following
* D - The number of clonoset neighbors. Neighbor is a similar sequence with one 
mismatch
* VJ_n_total - Number of unique sequences with the given VJ combination
* Pgen - Probability to be generated, computed by OLGA
* Pgen_sum_corr - The sum of Pgen of all sequences similar to the given with one
mismatch
* Pgen_by_VJ - conditional probability. The sum of probabilities to be generated 
with the given VJ combination
* p_val - p value under the null hypothesis that the number of sequence's neighbors
is not more than in the random model
* p_adjust - p value with multiple testing correction

### Additional functions for ALICE analysis

```pval_with_abundance(clonoset)``` The function takes the output of the ALICE_pipeline 
function and adjusts the p-value, taking into account the abundance of every clonotype.
There are two additional columns in the output depending on count normalization:
"pval_with_abundance_log2_counts" - Log2 is used for count normalization; 
"pval_with_abundance_counts" - no count normalization.

## edgeR analysis

```edgeR_pipeline``` The function performs statistical analysis by edgeR to 
identify significantly expanded clonotypes. First, it filters the data using 
relatively mild conditions that better suit TCR repertoire data. Second, it 
normalizes counts and estimates dispersion by standard edgeR methods. Finally, 
it performs all pairwise comparisons between groups and compares each group vs. 
all others using the GLM and QL F-test.

To use the edgeR_pipeline function, you should create a TCRgrapherCounts object.
TCRgrapherCounts is a subclass of TCRgrapher with additional slots: count_table
and feature_info. Count data could be aggregated in the following ways. First, 
clonotypes with the same amino acid sequences and V gene would be merged together
using the default parameters  ```TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject)```. Second, 
clonotypes with the same amino acid sequences and VJ combination would be merged 
together using the j_jene parameter ```TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject, j_gene = TRUE)```.
Third, clonotypes with the same amino acid sequences regardless of VJ would be merged.
```TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject, v_gene = FALSE, j_gene = FALSE)```. Finally, 
clonotypes from the same connectivity component found by the make_TCR_graph and 
find_TCR_components functions would be grouped together by running 
```TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject, cluster_id = TRUE)```

Metadata must contain a column that specifies levels of comparison. The name of the
column is the second parameter of the edgeR_pipeline function.

```R
library(edgeR)
# data loading
TCRgrObject <- TCRgrapher(dir_path, 1, 3, 4, 5, 7, metadata_path, 1, 2)
# create a count table with aggregation by V segments
TCRgrCounts <- TCRgrapherCounts(TCRgrObject)
# run EdgeR pipeline 
edgeR_res <- edgeR_pipeline(TCRgrCounts, your_comparison)
```

### Additional functions

```make_TCR_graph(clonoset, v_gene = TRUE, j_gene = FALSE)``` 
The function makes a graph from a clonoset table with the igraph package. Every
node of the graph is a unique clonotype from the table (one line). Edges connect
clonotypes with one amino acid mismatch or identical clonotypes if they were in 
separate lines. If 'v_gene' and 'j_gene' are TRUE, edges connect only clonotypes
with the same V gene or VJ combination.

```find_TCR_components(clonoset, graph)``` The function takes a clonoset table 
and make_TCR_graph output and returns the same clonoset table with an additional
column "cluster_id". All clusters of neighbors with one mismatch have a unique id.

```find_TCR_components_by_bfs(clonoset)``` The function takes a clonoset table
and returns the same clonoset table with an additional 
column "cluster_id". All clusters of neighbors with one mismatch have a unique id.
